docs/ARCHITECTURE.md, before:

# Zotero Archivist: Modern Chromium Architecture and Implementation Plan

## 1) Re-evaluation Summary

1. Use native `chrome.sidePanel` as the primary UI surface.
2. Keep content-script work on-demand, not always injected.
3. Use least-privilege permissions and optional host access flow.
4. Make queue orchestration resilient to MV3 service worker suspension.
5. Isolate Zotero integration behind provider adapters with explicit fallback modes.

## 2) Product Requirements

1. Side panel for workflow controls.
2. User-customizable panel width.
3. Collect URLs from page using configured selectors.
4. Select/deselect collected links for archival queue.
5. Archive each selected URL with **Save to Zotero (Web Page with Snapshot)** behavior.

## 3) Browser-Platform Decisions

## 3.1 Side panel implementation

1. Primary: use Chrome/Chromium `chrome.sidePanel`.
2. Width handling: native side panel is user-resizable by browser chrome; extension does not manage pixel width directly.
3. No compatibility-mode in-page panel; `chrome.sidePanel` is the only supported UI surface.

## 3.2 MV3 runtime model

1. Background logic runs in a service worker and must be restart-safe.
2. Long-running queue operations are modeled as resumable state transitions.
3. No assumptions of in-memory persistence across worker sleeps.

## 4) Zotero Connector Reality Check (from local `zotero-connectors/`)

1. The "Web Page with Snapshot" action maps to:
   - `saveAsWebpage(tab, 0, { snapshot: true })`
   - source: `zotero-connectors/src/browserExt/background.js:692`
2. There is no public external extension API:
   - no `externally_connectable`
   - no `onMessageExternal`
   - source: `zotero-connectors/src/browserExt/manifest-v3.json:1`
3. There is an undocumented internal message bridge via web-accessible iframe:
   - `chromeMessageIframe/messageIframe.html`
   - source: `zotero-connectors/src/browserExt/manifest-v3.json:46`
4. Conclusion: integration must treat connector internals as volatile and provide fallback.

## 5) Target Architecture

## 5.1 Components

1. `sidepanel/` app
   - Selector rules UI
   - Link review + selection
   - Queue controls and status
   - Integration diagnostics (connector detected, mode, last error)

2. `background/service-worker.js`
   - Queue state machine
   - Tab lifecycle management
   - Save provider orchestration
   - Persistence + recovery

3. `content/collector.js` (on-demand)
   - Injected only when collecting links
   - Evaluates selector rules and returns normalized candidates

4. `zotero/providers/*`
   - `connectorBridgeProvider` (advanced/experimental)
   - `localApiProvider` (future option)

5. `shared/protocol.js`
   - Message contracts between sidepanel, background, and content scripts
   - Runtime schema validation

## 5.2 Recommended structure

```txt
zotero-archivist/
├── manifest.json
├── background/
│   ├── service-worker.js
│   ├── queue-engine.js
│   └── tab-controller.js
├── sidepanel/
│   ├── panel.html
│   ├── panel.css
│   ├── panel.js
│   └── store.js
├── content/
│   └── collector.js
├── zotero/
│   ├── provider-interface.js
│   ├── provider-connector-bridge.js
│   └── provider-local-api.js
├── shared/
│   ├── protocol.js
│   ├── schema.js
│   └── urls.js
└── docs/
    └── integration-notes.md
```

## 6) Permission and Manifest Best Practices

## 6.1 Manifest

1. `manifest_version: 3`
2. `action` for quick open + status icon
3. `side_panel.default_path` for primary UI
4. `background.service_worker` only; no persistent background page

## 6.2 Permissions strategy (least privilege)

1. Required:
   - `storage`
   - `alarms` (required once queue engine watchdog is enabled)
   - `tabs`
   - `scripting`
   - `sidePanel`
2. Optional:
   - `management` only if connector discovery by extension id is implemented
3. Host permissions:
   - prefer `optional_host_permissions`: `https://*/*`, `http://*/*`
   - request at runtime when user starts collection/queue, not at install

## 6.3 What to avoid

1. Avoid always-on `<all_urls>` content scripts.
2. Avoid DOM-injected iframe sidebars as default UI.
3. Avoid relying on service-worker memory for queue state.

## 7) Data Contracts

```ts
type SelectorRule = {
  id: string;
  name: string;
  cssSelector: string;
  urlAttribute: string; // default "href"
  includePattern?: string;
  excludePattern?: string;
  enabled: boolean;
};

type LinkCandidate = {
  id: string;
  url: string;
  title: string;
  sourceSelectorId: string;
  selected: boolean;
  dedupeKey: string;
};

type QueueItemStatus =
  | "pending"
  | "opening_tab"
  | "saving_snapshot"
  | "archived"
  | "failed"
  | "cancelled";

type QueueItem = {
  id: string;
  url: string;
  title: string;
  status: QueueItemStatus;
  attempts: number;
  lastError?: string;
  createdAt: number;
  updatedAt: number;
};

type SaveProviderMode = "connector_bridge" | "local_api";
```

## 8) Queue Engine (MV3-safe)

Use a deterministic state machine with persisted checkpoints.

1. Store durable queue state in `chrome.storage.local`.
2. Store queue runtime pointers (`status`, `activeQueueItemId`, `activeTabId`) in `chrome.storage.local` for restart safety.
3. Optionally mirror transient execution pointers to `chrome.storage.session` in future as a non-authoritative cache.
4. Use event-driven progression:
   - `tabs.onUpdated` for load-complete
   - `tabs.onRemoved` for unexpected queue tab closure
   - explicit step commits per item
5. Use `chrome.alarms` for watchdog/retry and recovery after worker suspend.
6. Default concurrency = `1` for predictable Zotero behavior.

State transitions:

1. `pending -> opening_tab -> saving_snapshot -> archived`
2. `saving_snapshot -> failed` on provider or bridge errors
3. Any active state -> `failed` on terminal error/timeout

Current Phase 3 behavior (2026-02-14):

1. Queue controls (`start`, `pause`, `resume`, `stop`, `retry failed`) are wired in the side panel and background runtime.
2. `pending -> opening_tab -> saving_snapshot` now routes through provider orchestration in background.
3. Queue save completion/failure is fully automated; there is no user-confirmation queue state.
4. Connector bridge is feature-flagged and health-checked; when unavailable, save attempts fail with explicit diagnostics.

## 9) URL Collection Flow

1. User clicks "Collect Links" in side panel.
2. Background injects `content/collector.js` into active tab via `chrome.scripting.executeScript`.
3. Collector applies enabled selector rules and returns normalized URLs.
4. Background dedupes and sends candidates to side panel store.
5. User curates selection and submits queue.

Collector best practices:

1. Enforce protocol allowlist (`http`, `https`).
2. Resolve relative URLs against `document.baseURI`.
3. Cap max collected links per run (configurable safety limit).
4. Return metadata only; no unnecessary DOM capture.

## 10) Zotero Save Provider Strategy

Treat Zotero save path as a pluggable provider with capability checks.

## 10.1 Provider interface

```ts
interface ZoteroSaveProvider {
  mode: SaveProviderMode;
  checkHealth(): Promise<{ ok: boolean; details?: string }>;
  saveWebPageWithSnapshot(input: { tabId: number; url: string; title?: string }): Promise<{
    ok: boolean;
    error?: string;
  }>;
}
```

## 10.2 Provider order

1. `connector_bridge` (if explicitly enabled and health check passes)
2. `local_api` (future; not in MVP)

## 10.3 Connector bridge provider (advanced)

1. Uses Zotero internal iframe bridge endpoint discovered in analysis.
2. Sends save command equivalent to connector snapshot action.
3. Guardrails:
   - feature flag
   - strict timeout
   - compatibility/version probes
   - fail-closed behavior with explicit diagnostics

## 10.4 Connector completion semantics

1. Archivist treats a bridge call as successful when `Messaging.sendMessage("saveAsWebpage", ...)` resolves without throwing.
2. Archivist treats connector rejection/throw as a save failure.
3. There is no stable external callback that confirms completion beyond this bridge response contract.
4. Connector popup events (for example `progressWindow.done`) are internal connector messages and are not used as Archivist success signals.
5. This contract is based on current connector internals and should be revalidated when connector versions change.

## 10.5 Failure handling

1. Queue items move to `failed` when save commands error or time out.
2. Errors are surfaced in queue item `lastError` and provider diagnostics.
3. Retry flow requeues failed/cancelled items after operator action.

## 11) Side Panel UX Plan

1. Sections:
   - Source selectors
   - Collected links
   - Queue
   - Integration status
2. Selection controls:
   - select all
   - clear all
   - invert
   - search/filter
3. Queue controls:
   - start
   - pause
   - resume
   - stop
   - retry failed
4. Operational clarity:
   - current mode (`connector_bridge`, future `local_api`)
   - active Zotero detection state
   - explicit warnings on degraded mode

## 12) Storage Plan

1. `chrome.storage.sync`:
   - selector rules
   - UI preferences
   - safe non-sensitive defaults
2. `chrome.storage.local`:
   - queue items
   - queue runtime state (`queueRuntime`)
   - queue history
   - provider diagnostics
3. `chrome.storage.session`:
   - optional future mirror of current run pointer
   - in-progress tab IDs
   - temporary retries

## 13) Security and Privacy

1. No remote code execution or dynamic script URLs.
2. Validate all inbound/outbound message payloads.
3. Do not persist full page content in archivist storage.
4. Minimize retained data (URLs/titles/status only).
5. Redact sensitive query params in logs/UI where appropriate.

## 14) Testing Strategy

1. Unit tests:
   - selector filtering and URL normalization
   - queue state transitions
   - provider availability routing
2. Integration tests (extension-level):
   - side panel to collector roundtrip
   - queue resilience across service worker restarts
3. Connector contract tests:
   - bridge health check
   - snapshot save smoke test against local Zotero connector
   - failure diagnostics when bridge is unavailable

## 15) Implementation Phases

### Phase 0: Foundation choices

1. Scaffold MV3 + sidePanel + typed message protocol.
2. Implement storage abstractions and queue state reducer.

### Phase 1: Link collection workflow

1. Build selector UI.
2. Implement on-demand collector injection.
3. Implement selection and queue authoring.

### Phase 2: Queue engine

1. Implement tab lifecycle controller.
2. Implement pause/resume/stop/retry and recovery logic.
3. Add alarm-based watchdog handling.

### Phase 3: Save providers

1. Implement `connector_bridge` provider behind feature flag.
2. Add health checks and explicit failure diagnostics.
3. Keep `local_api` as a future provider path.

### Phase 4: Hardening

1. Add diagnostics panel.
2. Add contract tests against installed connector.
3. Add compatibility kill switch for bridge regressions.

### Phase 5: Optional future path

1. Evaluate `local_api` provider against Zotero local connector endpoints.
2. Compare reliability/maintenance cost versus bridge mode.

## 16) MVP Definition (Best-Practice Baseline)

MVP should be considered complete when:

1. Side panel workflow is fully functional using native `chrome.sidePanel`.
2. URL collection and curation are stable on modern sites.
3. Queue is restart-safe under MV3 worker suspension.
4. Connector bridge mode works as an opt-in path with clear diagnostics on failure.

Commit message:

Enable connector bridge by default

docs/ARCHITECTURE.md, after:

# Zotero Archivist: Modern Chromium Architecture and Implementation Plan

## 1) Re-evaluation Summary

1. Use native `chrome.sidePanel` as the primary UI surface.
2. Keep content-script work on-demand, not always injected.
3. Use least-privilege permissions and optional host access flow.
4. Make queue orchestration resilient to MV3 service worker suspension.
5. Isolate Zotero integration behind provider adapters with explicit fallback modes.

## 2) Product Requirements

1. Side panel for workflow controls.
2. User-customizable panel width.
3. Collect URLs from page using configured selectors.
4. Select/deselect collected links for archival queue.
5. Archive each selected URL with **Save to Zotero (Web Page with Snapshot)** behavior.

## 3) Browser-Platform Decisions

## 3.1 Side panel implementation

1. Primary: use Chrome/Chromium `chrome.sidePanel`.
2. Width handling: native side panel is user-resizable by browser chrome; extension does not manage pixel width directly.
3. No compatibility-mode in-page panel; `chrome.sidePanel` is the only supported UI surface.

## 3.2 MV3 runtime model

1. Background logic runs in a service worker and must be restart-safe.
2. Long-running queue operations are modeled as resumable state transitions.
3. No assumptions of in-memory persistence across worker sleeps.

## 4) Zotero Connector Reality Check (from local `zotero-connectors/`)

1. The "Web Page with Snapshot" action maps to:
   - `saveAsWebpage(tab, 0, { snapshot: true })`
   - source: `zotero-connectors/src/browserExt/background.js:692`
2. There is no public external extension API:
   - no `externally_connectable`
   - no `onMessageExternal`
   - source: `zotero-connectors/src/browserExt/manifest-v3.json:1`
3. There is an undocumented internal message bridge via web-accessible iframe:
   - `chromeMessageIframe/messageIframe.html`
   - source: `zotero-connectors/src/browserExt/manifest-v3.json:46`
4. Conclusion: integration must treat connector internals as volatile and provide fallback.

## 5) Target Architecture

## 5.1 Components

1. `sidepanel/` app
   - Selector rules UI
   - Link review + selection
   - Queue controls and status
   - Integration diagnostics (connector detected, mode, last error)

2. `background/service-worker.js`
   - Queue state machine
   - Tab lifecycle management
   - Save provider orchestration
   - Persistence + recovery

3. `content/collector.js` (on-demand)
   - Injected only when collecting links
   - Evaluates selector rules and returns normalized candidates

4. `zotero/providers/*`
   - `connectorBridgeProvider` (default provider)
   - `localApiProvider` (future option)

5. `shared/protocol.js`
   - Message contracts between sidepanel, background, and content scripts
   - Runtime schema validation

## 5.2 Recommended structure

```txt
zotero-archivist/
├── manifest.json
├── background/
│   ├── service-worker.js
│   ├── queue-engine.js
│   └── tab-controller.js
├── sidepanel/
│   ├── panel.html
│   ├── panel.css
│   ├── panel.js
│   └── store.js
├── content/
│   └── collector.js
├── zotero/
│   ├── provider-interface.js
│   ├── provider-connector-bridge.js
│   └── provider-local-api.js
├── shared/
│   ├── protocol.js
│   ├── schema.js
│   └── urls.js
└── docs/
    └── integration-notes.md
```

## 6) Permission and Manifest Best Practices

## 6.1 Manifest

1. `manifest_version: 3`
2. `action` for quick open + status icon
3. `side_panel.default_path` for primary UI
4. `background.service_worker` only; no persistent background page

## 6.2 Permissions strategy (least privilege)

1. Required:
   - `storage`
   - `alarms` (required once queue engine watchdog is enabled)
   - `tabs`
   - `scripting`
   - `sidePanel`
2. Optional:
   - `management` only if connector discovery by extension id is implemented
3. Host permissions:
   - prefer `optional_host_permissions`: `https://*/*`, `http://*/*`
   - request at runtime when user starts collection/queue, not at install

## 6.3 What to avoid

1. Avoid always-on `<all_urls>` content scripts.
2. Avoid DOM-injected iframe sidebars as default UI.
3. Avoid relying on service-worker memory for queue state.

## 7) Data Contracts

```ts
type SelectorRule = {
  id: string;
  name: string;
  cssSelector: string;
  urlAttribute: string; // default "href"
  includePattern?: string;
  excludePattern?: string;
  enabled: boolean;
};

type LinkCandidate = {
  id: string;
  url: string;
  title: string;
  sourceSelectorId: string;
  selected: boolean;
  dedupeKey: string;
};

type QueueItemStatus =
  | "pending"
  | "opening_tab"
  | "saving_snapshot"
  | "archived"
  | "failed"
  | "cancelled";

type QueueItem = {
  id: string;
  url: string;
  title: string;
  status: QueueItemStatus;
  attempts: number;
  lastError?: string;
  createdAt: number;
  updatedAt: number;
};

type SaveProviderMode = "connector_bridge" | "local_api";
```

## 8) Queue Engine (MV3-safe)

Use a deterministic state machine with persisted checkpoints.

1. Store durable queue state in `chrome.storage.local`.
2. Store queue runtime pointers (`status`, `activeQueueItemId`, `activeTabId`) in `chrome.storage.local` for restart safety.
3. Optionally mirror transient execution pointers to `chrome.storage.session` in future as a non-authoritative cache.
4. Use event-driven progression:
   - `tabs.onUpdated` for load-complete
   - `tabs.onRemoved` for unexpected queue tab closure
   - explicit step commits per item
5. Use `chrome.alarms` for watchdog/retry and recovery after worker suspend.
6. Default concurrency = `1` for predictable Zotero behavior.

State transitions:

1. `pending -> opening_tab -> saving_snapshot -> archived`
2. `saving_snapshot -> failed` on provider or bridge errors
3. Any active state -> `failed` on terminal error/timeout

Current Phase 3 behavior (2026-02-14):

1. Queue controls (`start`, `pause`, `resume`, `stop`, `retry failed`) are wired in the side panel and background runtime.
2. `pending -> opening_tab -> saving_snapshot` now routes through provider orchestration in background.
3. Queue save completion/failure is fully automated; there is no user-confirmation queue state.
4. Connector bridge is toggle-controlled and health-checked; when unavailable, save attempts fail with explicit diagnostics.

## 9) URL Collection Flow

1. User clicks "Collect Links" in side panel.
2. Background injects `content/collector.js` into active tab via `chrome.scripting.executeScript`.
3. Collector applies enabled selector rules and returns normalized URLs.
4. Background dedupes and sends candidates to side panel store.
5. User curates selection and submits queue.

Collector best practices:

1. Enforce protocol allowlist (`http`, `https`).
2. Resolve relative URLs against `document.baseURI`.
3. Cap max collected links per run (configurable safety limit).
4. Return metadata only; no unnecessary DOM capture.

## 10) Zotero Save Provider Strategy

Treat Zotero save path as a pluggable provider with capability checks.

## 10.1 Provider interface

```ts
interface ZoteroSaveProvider {
  mode: SaveProviderMode;
  checkHealth(): Promise<{ ok: boolean; details?: string }>;
  saveWebPageWithSnapshot(input: { tabId: number; url: string; title?: string }): Promise<{
    ok: boolean;
    error?: string;
  }>;
}
```

## 10.2 Provider order

1. `connector_bridge` (if explicitly enabled and health check passes)
2. `local_api` (future; not in MVP)

## 10.3 Connector bridge provider (advanced)

1. Uses Zotero internal iframe bridge endpoint discovered in analysis.
2. Sends save command equivalent to connector snapshot action.
3. Guardrails:
   - feature flag
   - strict timeout
   - compatibility/version probes
   - fail-closed behavior with explicit diagnostics

## 10.4 Connector completion semantics

1. Archivist treats a bridge call as successful when `Messaging.sendMessage("saveAsWebpage", ...)` resolves without throwing.
2. Archivist treats connector rejection/throw as a save failure.
3. There is no stable external callback that confirms completion beyond this bridge response contract.
4. Connector popup events (for example `progressWindow.done`) are internal connector messages and are not used as Archivist success signals.
5. This contract is based on current connector internals and should be revalidated when connector versions change.

## 10.5 Failure handling

1. Queue items move to `failed` when save commands error or time out.
2. Errors are surfaced in queue item `lastError` and provider diagnostics.
3. Retry flow requeues failed/cancelled items after operator action.

## 11) Side Panel UX Plan

1. Sections:
   - Source selectors
   - Collected links
   - Queue
   - Integration status
2. Selection controls:
   - select all
   - clear all
   - invert
   - search/filter
3. Queue controls:
   - start
   - pause
   - resume
   - stop
   - retry failed
4. Operational clarity:
   - current mode (`connector_bridge`, future `local_api`)
   - active Zotero detection state
   - explicit warnings on degraded mode

## 12) Storage Plan

1. `chrome.storage.sync`:
   - selector rules
   - UI preferences
   - safe non-sensitive defaults
2. `chrome.storage.local`:
   - queue items
   - queue runtime state (`queueRuntime`)
   - queue history
   - provider diagnostics
3. `chrome.storage.session`:
   - optional future mirror of current run pointer
   - in-progress tab IDs
   - temporary retries

## 13) Security and Privacy

1. No remote code execution or dynamic script URLs.
2. Validate all inbound/outbound message payloads.
3. Do not persist full page content in archivist storage.
4. Minimize retained data (URLs/titles/status only).
5. Redact sensitive query params in logs/UI where appropriate.

## 14) Testing Strategy

1. Unit tests:
   - selector filtering and URL normalization
   - queue state transitions
   - provider availability routing
2. Integration tests (extension-level):
   - side panel to collector roundtrip
   - queue resilience across service worker restarts
3. Connector contract tests:
   - bridge health check
   - snapshot save smoke test against local Zotero connector
   - failure diagnostics when bridge is unavailable

## 15) Implementation Phases

### Phase 0: Foundation choices

1. Scaffold MV3 + sidePanel + typed message protocol.
2. Implement storage abstractions and queue state reducer.

### Phase 1: Link collection workflow

1. Build selector UI.
2. Implement on-demand collector injection.
3. Implement selection and queue authoring.

### Phase 2: Queue engine

1. Implement tab lifecycle controller.
2. Implement pause/resume/stop/retry and recovery logic.
3. Add alarm-based watchdog handling.

### Phase 3: Save providers

1. Implement `connector_bridge` provider behind feature flag.
2. Add health checks and explicit failure diagnostics.
3. Keep `local_api` as a future provider path.

### Phase 4: Hardening

1. Add diagnostics panel.
2. Add contract tests against installed connector.
3. Add compatibility kill switch for bridge regressions.

### Phase 5: Optional future path

1. Evaluate `local_api` provider against Zotero local connector endpoints.
2. Compare reliability/maintenance cost versus bridge mode.

## 16) MVP Definition (Best-Practice Baseline)

MVP should be considered complete when:

1. Side panel workflow is fully functional using native `chrome.sidePanel`.
2. URL collection and curation are stable on modern sites.
3. Queue is restart-safe under MV3 worker suspension.
4. Connector bridge mode is enabled by default and provides clear diagnostics on failure.
